Vladimir Lenin (born April 10 [April 22, New Style], 1870, Simbirsk, Russia—died January 21, 1924, Gorki [later Gorki Leninskiye], near Moscow) was the founder of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks), inspirer and leader of the Bolshevik Revolution (1917), and the architect, builder, and first head (1917–24) of the Soviet state.
He was the founder of the organization known as Comintern (Communist International) and the posthumous source of “Leninism,” the doctrine codified and conjoined with Karl Marx’s works by Lenin’s successors to form Marxism-Leninism, which became the Communist worldview.
If the Bolshevik Revolution is—as some people have called it—the most significant political event of the 20th century, then Lenin must for good or ill be regarded as the century’s most significant political leader.
Not only in the scholarly circles of the former Soviet Union but even among many non-Communist scholars, he has been regarded as both the greatest revolutionary leader and revolutionary statesman in history, as well as the greatest revolutionary thinker since Marx.
It is difficult to identify any particular events in his childhood that might prefigure his turn onto the path of a professional revolutionary.
(He adopted the pseudonym Lenin in 1901 during his clandestine party work after exile in Siberia.)
He was the third of six children born into a close-knit, happy family of highly educated and cultured parents.
His mother was the daughter of a physician, while his father, though the son of a serf, became a schoolteacher and rose to the position of inspector of schools.
He graduated from high school ranking first in his class.
When he was 16, nothing in Lenin indicated a future rebel, still less a professional revolutionary—except, perhaps, his turn to atheism.
But, despite the comfortable circumstances of their upbringing, all five of the Ulyanov children who reached maturity joined the revolutionary movement.
This was not an uncommon phenomenon in tsarist Russia, where even the highly educated and cultured intelligentsia were denied elementary civil and political rights.
Napoleon Bonaparte, as he may henceforth be called (though the family did not drop the spelling Buonaparte until after 1796), rejoined his regiment at Nice in June 1793.
In his Le Souper de Beaucaire (Supper at Beaucaire), written at this time, he argued vigorously for united action by all republicans rallied round the Jacobins, who were becoming progressively more radical, and the National Convention, the Revolutionary assembly that in the preceding fall had abolished the monarchy.
With the commander of the National Convention’s artillery wounded, Bonaparte got the post through the commissioner to the army, Antoine Saliceti, who was a Corsican deputy and a friend of Napoleon’s family.
Bonaparte was promoted to major in September and adjutant general in October.
This conviction puts socialism in opposition to capitalism, which is based on private ownership of the means of production and allows individual choices in a free market to determine how goods and services are distributed.
Socialists complain that capitalism necessarily leads to unfair and exploitative concentrations of wealth and power in the hands of the relative few who emerge victorious from free-market competition—people who then use their wealth and power to reinforce their dominance in society.
Because such people are rich, they may choose where and how to live, and their choices in turn limit the options of the poor.
As a result, terms such as individual freedom and equality of opportunity may be meaningful for capitalists but can only ring hollow for working people, who must do the capitalists’ bidding if they are to survive.
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels made this point in Manifesto of the Communist Party (1848) when they proclaimed that in a socialist society “the condition for the free development of each is the free development of all.”
The next question is whether there is any pair of words in which the two phones are in minimal contrast (or opposition); that is, whether there is any context in English in which the occurrence of the one rather than the other has the effect of distinguishing two or more words (in the way that [ph] versus [b] distinguishes the so-called minimal pairs “pit” and “bit,” “pan” and “ban,” and so on).
If there is, it can be said that, despite their phonetic similarity, the two phones realize (or “belong to”) different phonemes—that the difference between them is phonemic.
If there is no context in which the two phones are in contrast (or opposition) in this sense, it can be said that they are variants of the same phoneme—that the difference between them is nonphonemic.
In several other languages—e.g., Hindi—the contrast between such sounds as [ph] and [p] is phonemic, however.
The question is rather more complicated than it has been represented here.
In particular, it should be noted that [p] is phonetically similar to [b] as well as to [ph] and that, although [ph] and [b] are in contrast, [p] and [b] are not.
It would thus be possible to regard [p] and [b] as variants of the same phoneme.
Most linguists, however, have taken the alternative view, assigning [p] to the same phoneme as [ph].
Pacific settlement of disputes is based upon the assumption that war is primarily a technique for settling disputes, although it can, of course, also serve other purposes, such as allaying fears and seeking status.
Further assumptions are that war frequently comes about because of the unawareness of decision makers of the possibility of settling disputes peacefully to the mutual advantage of both sides—an unawareness due to mere ignorance, pride, lack of imagination, or selfish and cynical leadership.
It is thus possible that international organizations can contribute to the prevention of wars by devising and institutionalizing alternative, peaceful techniques for the settlement of disputes and by persuading the states to use them.
Hence, what the procedures really offer is a means of slowing down the progression of a dispute toward war, giving reason a chance to prevail.
Chromatography, used for generations to separate mixtures and identify the presence of a target substance, was ever more impressively automated, and gas chromatography (GC) in particular experienced vigorous development.
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), which uses radio waves interacting with a magnetic field to reveal the chemical environments of hydrogen atoms in a compound, was also developed after World War II.
Also by this time, GC-NMR combinations were introduced, providing chemists unexcelled ability to separate and analyze minute amounts of sample.
In the 1980s NMR became well known to the general public, when the technique was applied to medicine—though the name of the application was altered to magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to avoid the loaded word nuclear.
